[[cha:halshow]]

= Halshow

The script halshow can help you find your way around a running HAL.
This is a very specialized system and it must connect to a working HAL.
It cannot run standalone because it relies on the ability of HAL to
report what it knows of itself through the halcmd interface library. It
is discovery based. Each time halshow runs with a different LinuxCNC
configuration it will be different.

As we will soon see, this ability of HAL to document itself is one key
to making an effective CNC system.

== Starting Halshow

Halshow is in the AXIS menu under Machine/Show HAL Configuration.

Halshow is in the TkLinuxCNC menu under Scripts/HAL Show.

Halshow can be started from a terminal command line and specify
formats for integer and float items (pins or signals) and identify a
saved watchlist file to use:

----
$ halshow --help
Usage:
  halshow [Options] [watchfile]
  Options:
           --help    (this help)
           --fformat format_string_for_float
           --iformat format_string_for_int

Notes:
       Create watchfile in halshow using: 'File/Save Watch List'
       linuxcnc must be running for standalone usage
----

Example to limit number of decimal points for floats
and used a file named my.halshow in the current directory:

----
$ halshow  --fformat ".5f" ./my.halshow
----

== HAL Tree Area

At the left of its display as shown in figure is a tree view, somewhat like
you might see with some file browsers. At the right is a tabbed notebook with
tabs for show and watch.

[[cap:halshow-layout]]

.Halshow Layout

image::images/halshow-1.png[align="center", alt="Halshow Layout"]

The tree shows all of the major parts of a HAL. In front of each is a
small plus (+) or minus (-) sign in a box. Clicking the plus will
expand that tree node to display what is under it. If that box shows a
minus sign, clicking it will collapse that section of the tree.

You can also expand or collapse the tree display using the Tree View
menu at the upper left edge of the display. Under Tree View you will
find: Expand Tree, Collapse Tree; Expand Pins, Expand Parameters,
Expand Signals; and Erase Watch. (Note that Erase Watch erases 'all'
previously set watches, you cannot erase just one watch.)

.Show Menu

image::images/halshow-3.png[align="center", alt="Show Menu"]

== HAL Show Area

Clicking on the node name, the word "Components" for example, will
show you (under the "Show" tab) all that HAL knows about the contents
of that node. Figure <<cap:halshow-layout>> shows a list exactly like
you will see if you click the "Components" name while you are running a
standard m5i20 servo card. The information display is exactly like
those shown in traditional text based HAL analysis tools. The advantage
here is that we have mouse click access, access that can be as broad or
as focused as you need.

If we take a closer look at the tree display we can see that the six
major parts of a HAL can all be expanded at least one level. As these
levels are expanded you can get more focused with the reply when you
click on the rightmost tree node. You will find that there are some HAL
pins and parameters that show more than one reply. This is due to the
nature of the search routines in halcmd itself. If you search one pin
you may get two, like this:

----
Component Pins: 
Owner  Type  Dir  Value  Name 
06     bit    -W   TRUE  parport.0.pin-10-in 
06     bit    -W  FALSE  parport.0.pin-10-in-not 
----

The second pin's name contains the complete name of the first.

Below the show area on the right is a set of widgets that will allow
you to play with the running HAL. The commands you enter here and the
effect that they have on the running HAL are not saved. They will
persist as long as LinuxCNC remains up but are gone as soon as LinuxCNC is.

The entry box labeled "Test HAL Command:" will accept any of the
commands listed for halcmd. These include:

 - loadrt, unloadrt (load/unload real-time module)
 - loadusr, unloadusr (load/unload user-space component)
 - addf, delf (add/delete a function to/from a real-time thread)
 - net (create a connection between two or more items)
 - setp (set parameter (or pin) to a value)

This little editor will enter a command any time you press <enter> or
push the execute button. An error message from halcmd will show below
this entry widget when these commands are not properly formed. If you
are not certain how to set up a proper command you'll need to read
again the documentation on halcmd and the specific modules that you are
working with.

Let's use this editor to add a differential module to a HAL and
connect it to axis position so that we could see the rate of change in
position, i.e., acceleration. We first need to load a HAL component named
ddt, add it to the servo thread, then connect it to the position pin
of a joint. Once that is done we can find the output of the
differentiator in halscope. So let's go. (Yes, I looked this one up.)

----
loadrt ddt
----

Now look at the components node and you should see ddt in there
someplace.

----
Loaded HAL Components:
ID Type        Name
10 User halcmd29800
09 User halcmd29374
08   RT         ddt
06   RT hal_parport
05   RT    scope_rt
04   RT     stepgen
03   RT      motmod
02 User   iocontrol
----

Sure enough there it is. Notice that its ID is 08. Next we need to
find out what functions are available with it so we look at functions:

----
Exported Functions: 
Owner  CodeAddr      Arg  FP Users Name 
  08   E0B97630 E0DC7674 YES     0 ddt.0 
  03   E0DEF83C 00000000 YES     1 motion-command-handler 
  03   E0DF0BF3 00000000 YES     1 motion-controller 
  06   E0B541FE E0DC75B8  NO     1 parport.0.read 
  06   E0B54270 E0DC75B8  NO     1 parport.0.write 
  06   E0B54309 E0DC75B8  NO     0 parport.read-all 
  06   E0B5433A E0DC75B8  NO     0 parport.write-all 
  05   E0AD712D 00000000  NO     0 scope.sample 
  04   E0B618C1 E0DC7448 YES     1 stepgen.capture-position 
  04   E0B612F5 E0DC7448  NO     1 stepgen.make-pulses 
  04   E0B614AD E0DC7448 YES     1 stepgen.update-freq 
----

Here we look for owner #08 and see a function
named ddt.0. We should be able to add ddt.0 to the servo thread and it
will do its math each time the servo thread is updated. Once again we
look up the addf command and find that it uses three arguments like
this:

----
addf <functname> <threadname> [<position>]
----

We already know the functname=ddt.0 so let's get the thread name right
by expanding the thread node in the tree. Here we see two threads,
servo-thread and base-thread. The position of ddt.0 in the thread is
not critical. So we add the function ddt.0 to the servo-thread:

----
addf ddt.0 servo-thread
----

This is just for viewing, so we leave position blank and get the last
position in the thread. The following figure shows the state of halshow
after this command has been issued.

.Addf Command

image::images/halshow-2.png[align="center", alt="Addf Command"]

Next we need to connect ddt to something. But how do we know
what pins are available? The answer is to look under pins. There we
find ddt and see this:

----
Component Pins: 
Owner Type  Dir Value       Name 
08    float R-  0.00000e+00 ddt.0.in 
08    float -W  0.00000e+00 ddt.0.out 
----

That looks easy enough to understand, but what signal or pin do we
want to connect to it? It could be an axis pin, a stepgen pin, or a
signal. We see this when we look at joint.0:

----
Component Pins: 
Owner Type  Dir Value       Name 
03    float -W  0.00000e+00 joint.0.motor-pos-cmd ==> Xpos-cmd
----

So it looks like Xpos-cmd should be a good signal to use. Back to the
editor where we enter the following command:

----
linksp Xpos-cmd ddt.0.in
----

Now if we look at the Xpos-cmd signal using the tree node we'll see
what we've done:

----
Signals: 
Type Value Name 
float 0.00000e+00 Xpos-cmd
<== joint.0.motor-pos-cmd
==> ddt.0.in 
==> stepgen.0.position-cmd
----

We see that this signal comes from joint.o.motor-pos-cmd and goes to
both ddt.0.in and stepgen.0.position-cmd. By connecting our block to
the signal we have avoided any complications with the normal flow of
this motion command.

The HAL Show Area uses halcmd to discover what is happening in a
running HAL. It gives you complete information about what it has
discovered. It also updates as you issue commands from the little
editor panel to modify that HAL. There are times when you want a
different set of things displayed without all of the information
available in this area. That is where the HAL Watch Area is of value.

== Watch Tab

Clicking the watch tab produces a blank canvas. You can add signals and pins
to this canvas and watch their values.footnote:[The refresh rate of the watch
display is much lower than Halmeter or Halscope. If you need good resolution
of the timing of signals those tools are much more effective.] You can add
signals or pins when the watch tab is displayed by clicking on the name of it.
The following figure shows this canvas with several "bit" type signals. These
signals include enable-out for the first three axes and two of the three
iocontrol "estop" signals. Notice that the axes are not enabled even though the
estop signals say that LinuxCNC is not in estop. A quick look at TkLinuxCNC
shows that the condition of LinuxCNC is ESTOP RESET. The amp enables do not
turn true until the machine has been turned on.

.Watch Tab

image::images/halshow-4.png[align="center", alt="Watch Tab"]

Watch displays bit type (binary) values using colored circles
representing LEDs. They show as dark brown when a bit signal or pin is
false, and as light yellow whenever that signal is true. If you select
a pin or signal that is not a bit type (binary) signal, watch will show
it as a numerical value.

Watch will quickly allow you to test switches or see the effect of
changes that you make to LinuxCNC while using the graphical interface.
Watch's refresh rate is a bit slow to see stepper pulses, but you can
use it for these if you move an axis very slowly or in very small
increments of distance. If you've used IO_Show in LinuxCNC, the watch page
in halshow can be set up to watch a parport much as IO_Show did.


