= Ladder Programming (((Classic Ladder)))

== Introduction

Ladder logic or the Ladder programming language is a method of drawing
electrical logic schematics. It is now a graphical language very
popular for programming Programmable Logic Controllers (PLCs). It was
originally invented to describe logic made from relays. The name is
based on the observation that programs in this language resemble
ladders, with two vertical "rails" and a series of horizontal "rungs" 
between them. In Germany and elsewhere in Europe, the style is to 
draw the rails horizontally along the top and bottom of the page 
while the rungs are drawn vertically from left to right.

A program in ladder logic, also called a ladder diagram, is similar to
a schematic for a set of relay circuits. Ladder logic is useful because
a wide variety of engineers and technicians can understand and use it
without much additional training because of the resemblance.

Ladder logic is widely used to program PLCs, where sequential control
of a process or manufacturing operation is required. Ladder logic is
useful for simple but critical control systems, or for reworking old
hardwired relay circuits. As programmable logic controllers became more
sophisticated it has also been used in very complex automation systems.

Ladder logic can be thought of as a rule-based language, rather than a
procedural language. A "rung" in the ladder represents a rule. When
implemented with relays and other electromechanical devices, the
various rules "execute" simultaneously and immediately. When
implemented in a programmable logic controller, the rules are typically
executed sequentially by software, in a loop. By executing the loop
fast enough, typically many times per second, the effect of
simultaneous and immediate execution is obtained.

== Example

The most common components of ladder are contacts (inputs), these
usually are either NC (normally closed) or NO (normally open), and
coils (outputs).

 - the NO contact image:images/ladder_action_load.png[]
 - the NC contact image:images/ladder_action_loadbar.png[]
 - the coil (output) image:images/ladder_action_out.png[]

Of course there are many more components to a full ladder language, 
but understanding these will help you grasp the overall concept.

The ladder consists of one or more rungs. These rungs are horizontal
traces (representing wires), with components on them (inputs, 
outputs and other), which get evaluated left to right.

This example is the simplest rung:

image:images/example_link_contact_coil.png[]

The input on the left, B0, a normally open contact, is connected to the
coil (output) on the right, Q0. Now imagine a voltage gets applied to the
leftmost end, because the input B0 turns true (e.g. the input is
activated, or the user pushed the NO contact). The voltage has a direct 
path to reach the coil (output) on the right, Q0. 
As a consequence, the Q0 coil (output) will turn from 0/off/false 
to 1/on/true. 
If the user releases B0, the Q0 output quickly returns to 0/off/false. 

== Basic Latching On-Off Circuit

Building on the above example, suppose we add a switch that closes 
whenever the coil Q0 is active. This would be the case in a relay, 
where the coil can activate the switch contacts; or in a contactor, 
where there are often several small auxilliary contacts 
in addition to the large 3-phase contacts that are the 
primary feature of the contactor. 

Since this auxilliary switch is driven from coil Q0 in our earlier 
example, we will give it the same number as the coil that drives it. 
This is the standard practice followed in all ladder programming, 
although it may seem strange at first to see a switch labeled the 
same as a coil. So let's call this auxilliary contact Q0 and 
connect it across the B0 "pushbutton" contact from our earlier example. 

Let's take a look at it: 

image:images/example_link_contact_coil2.png[]

As before, when the user presses pushbutton B0, coil Q0 comes on. 
And when coil Q0 comes on, switch Q0 comes on. Now the interesting 
part happens. When the user releases pushbutton B0, coil Q0 
does not stop as it did before. This is because switch Q0  
of this circuit is effectively holding the user's pushbutton 
pressed. So we see that switch Q0 is still holding coil Q0 on 
after the "start" pushbutton has been released. 

This type of contact on a coil or relay, used in this way, is 
often called a "holding contact", because it "holds on" the 
coil that it is associated with. It is also occasionally called 
a "seal" contact, and when it is active it is said that the 
circuit is "sealed". 

Unfortunately, our circuit so far has little practical use, 
because, although we have an "on" or "start" button in the form of 
pushbutton B0, we have no way to shut this circuit off once 
it is started. But that's easy to fix. All we need is a way to 
interrupt the power to coil Q0. So let's add a normally-closed 
(NC) pushbutton just ahead of coil Q0. 

Here's how that would look: 

image:images/example_link_contact_coil3.png[]

Now we have added "off" or "stop" pushbutton B1. If the user 
pushes it, contact from the rung to the coil is broken. 
When coil Q0 loses power, it drops to 0/off/false. When 
coil Q0 goes off, so does switch Q0, so the "holding contact" 
is broken, or the circuit is "unsealed". When the user releases 
the "stop" pushbutton, contact is restored from the rung to 
coil Q0, but the rung has gone dead, so the coil doesn't 
come back on. 

This circuit has been used for decades on virtually every 
machine that has a three-phase motor controlled by 
a contactor, so it was inevitable that it would be 
adopted by ladder/PLC programmers. It is also a very safe 
circuit, in that if "start" and "stop" are both pressed at 
the same time, the "stop" function always wins. 

This is the basic building block of much of ladder programming, 
so if you are new to it, you would do well to make sure that 
you understand how this circuit operates. 


