= Ladder programming 

== Introduction

Ladder logic or the Ladder programming language is a method of drawing
electrical logic schematics. It is now a graphical language very
popular for programming Programmable Logic Controllers (PLCs). It was
originally invented to describe logic made from relays. The name is
based on the observation that programs in this language resemble
ladders, with two vertical "rails" and a series of "rungs" between
them. In Germany and elsewhere in Europe, the style is to draw the
rails horizontal along the top and bottom of the page while the rungs
are drawn sequentially from left to right.

A program in ladder logic, also called a ladder diagram, is similar to
a schematic for a set of relay circuits. Ladder logic is useful because
a wide variety of engineers and technicians can understand and use it
without much additional training because of the resemblance.

Ladder logic is widely used to program PLCs, where sequential control
of a process or manufacturing operation is required. Ladder logic is
useful for simple but critical control systems, or for reworking old
hardwired relay circuits. As programmable logic controllers became more
sophisticated it has also been used in very complex automation systems.

Ladder logic can be thought of as a rule-based language, rather than a
procedural language. A "rung" in the ladder represents a rule. When
implemented with relays and other electromechanical devices, the
various rules "execute" simultaneously and immediately. When
implemented in a programmable logic controller, the rules are typically
executed sequentially by software, in a loop. By executing the loop
fast enough, typically many times per second, the effect of
simultaneous and immediate execution is obtained.

== Example

The most common components of ladder are contacts (inputs), these
usually are either NC (normally closed) or NO (normally open), and
coils (outputs).

 - the NO contact image:images/ladder_action_load.png[]
 - the NC contact image:images/ladder_action_loadbar.png[]
 - the coil (output) image:images/ladder_action_out.png[]

Of course there are way more components to a full ladder language, but
understanding these will help grasp the overall concept.

The ladder consists of one or more rungs. These rungs are horizontal
traces, with components on them (inputs, outputs and other), which get
evaluated left to right.

This example is the simplest rung:
image:images/example_link_contact_coil.png[]

The input on the left, a normal open contact is connected to the
output on the right Q0. Now imagine a voltage gets applied to the
leftmost end, as soon as the B0 turns true (e.g. the input is
activated, or the user pushed the NO contact), the voltage reaches the
right part Q0. As a consequence, the Q0 output will turn from 0 to 1.

